Phone Systems Tutorial
by The Jolly Roger
To start off, we will discuss the dialing procedures for domestic as well as international dialing. We will also take a
look at the telephone numbering plan.
North American Numbering Plan
In North America, the telephone numbering plan is as follows:
•
•
3 digit Numbering Plan Area (NPA) code , i.e., area code
7 digit telephone number consisting of a 3 digit Central Office (CO) code plus a 4 digit station numberThese 10 digits are called the network address or destination code. It is in the format of:
Area Code
Telephone #
---------
-----------
N*X
NXX-XXXX
Where: N = a digit from 2 to 9
* = the digit 0 or 1
X = a digit from 0 to 9
Area Codes
Check your telephone book or the separate listing of area codes found on many bbs's. Here are the special area codes
(SAC's):
510 - TWX (USA)
610 - TWX (Canada)
700 - New Service
710 - TWX (USA)
800 - WATS
810 - TWX (USA)
900 - DIAL-IT Services
910 - TWX (USA)
The other area codes never cross state lines, therefore each state must have at least one exclusive NPA code. When a
community is split by a state line, the CO numbers are often interchangeable (i.e., you can dial the same number from
two different area codes).
TWX (Telex II) consists of 5 teletype-writer area codes. They are owned by Western Union. These SAC's may only be
reached via other TWX machines. These run at 110 baud (last I checked! They are most likely faster now!). Besides the
TWX numbers, these machines are routed to normal telephone numbers. TWX machines always respond with an
answerback. For example, WU's FYI TWX # is (910) 279-5956. The answerback for this service is "WU FYI MAWA".
If you don't want to but a TWX machine, you can still send TWX messages using Easylink [800/325-4112]. However
you are gonna have to hack your way onto this one!
700:
700 is currently used by AT&T as a call forwarding service. It is targeted towards salesmen on the run. To understand
how this works, I'll explain it with an example. Let's say Joe Q. Salespig works for AT&T security and he is on the run
chasing a phreak around the country who royally screwed up an important COSMOS system. Let's say that Joe's 700 #
is (700) 382-5968. Every time Joe goes to a new hotel (or most likely SLEAZY MOTEL), he dials a special 700 #,
enters a code, and the number where he is staying. Now, if his boss received some important info, all he would do is
dial (700) 382-5968 and it would ring wherever Joe last programmed it to. Neat, huh?
800:
This SAC is one of my favorites since it allows for toll free calls. INWARD WATS (INWATS), or Inward Wide Area
Telecommunications Service is the 800 numbers that we are all familiar with. 800 numbers are set up in service areas
or bands. There are 6 of these. Band 6 is the largest and you can call a band 6 # from anywhere in the US except the
state where the call is terminated (that is why most companies have one 800 number for the country and then another
one for their state.) Band 5 includes the 48 contiguous states. All the way down to band 1 which includes only the
states contiguous to that one. Therefore, less people can reach a band 1 INWATS number than a band 6 number.
Intrastate INWATS #'s (i.e., you can call it from only 1 state) always have a 2 as the last digit in the exchange (i.e.,
800-NX2-XXXX). The NXX on 800 numbers represent the area where the business is located. For example, a number
beginning with 800-431 would terminate at a NY CO.800 numbers always end up in a hunt series in a CO. This means that it tries the first number allocated to the company
for their 800 lines; if this is busy, it will try the next number, etc. You must have a minimum of 2 lines for each 800
number. For example, Travelnet uses a hunt series. If you dial (800) 521-8400, it will first try the number associated
with 8400; if it is busy it will go to the next available port, etc. INWATS customers are billed by the number of hours
of calls made to their number.
OUTWATS (OUTWARD WATS): OUTWATS are for making outgoing calls only. Large companies use OUTWATS
since they receive bulk-rate discounts. Since OUTWATS numbers cannot have incoming calls, they are in the format
of:
(800) *XXX-XXXX
Where * is the digit 0 or 1 (or it may even be designated by a letter) which cannot be dialed unless you box the call.
The *XX identifies the type of service and the areas that the company can call.
Remember:
INWATS + OUTWATS = WATS EXTENDER
900:
This DIAL-IT SAC is a nationwide dial-it service. It is use for taking television polls and other stuff. The first minute
currently costs an outrageous 50-85 cents and each additional minute costs 35-85 cents. He'll take in a lot of revenue
this way!
Dial (900) 555-1212 to find out what is currently on this service.
CO CODES
These identify the switching office where the call is to be routed. The following CO codes are reserved nationwide:
555 - directory assistance
844 - time. These are now in!
936 - weather the 976 exchange
950 - future services
958 - plant test
959 - plant test
970 - plant test (temporary)
976 - DIAL-IT services
Also, the 3 digit ANI & ringback #'s are regarded as plant test and are thus reserved. These numbers vary from area to
area.
You cannot dial a 0 or 1 as the first digit of the exchange code (unless using a blue box!). This is due to the fact that
these exchanges (000-199) contains all sorts of interesting shit such as conference #'s, operators, test #'s, etc.
950:
Here are the services that are currently used by the 950 exchange:
1000 - SPC
1022 - MCI Execunet
1033 - US Telephone
1044 - Allnet
1066 - Lexitel
1088 - SBS Skyline
These SCC's (Specialized Common Carriers) are free from fortress phones! Also, the 950 exchange will probably be
phased out with the introduction of Equal Access.
Plant Tests:These include ANI, Ringback, and other various tests.
976:
Dial 976-1000 to see what is currently on the service. Also, many bbs's have listings of these numbers.
N11 codes:
----------
Bell is trying to phase out some of these, but they still exist in most areas.
011 - international dialing prefix
211 - coin refund operator
411 - directory assistance
611 - repair service
811 - business office
911 - EMERGENCY
International Dialing
With International Dialing, the world has been divided into 9 numbering zones. To make an international call, you
must first dial: International Prefix + Country code + National number.
In North America, the international dialing prefix is 011 for station-to-station calls. If you can dial International
numbers directly in your area then you have International Direct Distance Dialing (IDDD).
The country code, which varies from 1 to 3 digits, always has the world numbering zone as the first digit. For example,
the country code for the United Kingdom is 44, thus it is in world numbering zone 4. Some boards may contain a
complete listing of other country codes, but here I give you a few:
1 - North America (US, Canada, etc.)
20 - Egypt
258 - Mozambique
34 - Spain
49 - Germany
52 - Mexico (southern portion)
7 - USSR
81 - Japan
98 - Iran (call & hassle those bastards!)
If you call from an area other than North America, the format is generally the same. For example, let's say that you
wanted to call the White House from Switzerland to tell the president that his numbered bank account is overdrawn (it
happens, you know!). First you would dial 00 (the SWISS international dialing prefix), then 1 (the US country code),
followed by 202-456-1414 (the
national number for the White House. Just ask for Georgy and give him the bad news!)
Also, country code 87 is reserved for Maritime mobile service, i.e., calling ships:
871 - Marisat (Atlantic)
871 - Marisat (Pacific)
872 - Marisat (Indian)
International Switching:
------------------------
In North America there are currently 7 no. 4 ESS's that perform the duty of ISC (Inter-nation Switching Centers). All
international calls dialed from numbering zone 1 will be routed through one of these "gateway cities". They are:
182 - White Plains, NY
183 - New York, NY
184 - Pittsburgh, PA185 - Orlando, Fl
186 - Oakland, CA
187 - Denver, CO
188 - New York, NY
The 18X series are operator routing codes for overseas access (to be further discussed with blue boxes). All
international calls use a signaling service called CCITT. It is an international standard for signaling.
OK.. there you go for now! If you want to read more about this, read part two which is the next file #36 in the Jolly
Roger's cookbook!
36. Phone Systems Tutorial part II
by The Jolly Roger
Part II will deal with the various types of operators, office hierarchy, & switching equipment.
Operators
There are many types of operators in the network and the more common ones will be discussed.
TSPS Operator:
The TSPS [(Traffic Service Position System) as opposed to This Shitty Phone Service] Operator is probably the bitch
(or bastard, for the female liberationists out there) that most of us are used to having to deal with. Here are his/her
responsibilities:
1.Obtaining billing information for calling card or third number calls
2.Identifying called customer on person-to-person calls.
3.Obtaining acceptance of charges on collect calls.
4.Identifying calling numbers. This only happens when the calling number is not automatically recorded by
CAMA(Centralized Automatic Message Accounting) & forwarded from the local office. This could be caused by
equipment failures (ANIF- Automatic Number Identification Failure) or if the office is not equipped for CAMA
(ONI- Operator Number Identification).
I once had an equipment failure happen to me & the TSPS operator came on and said, "What number are you calling
FROM?" Out of curiosity, I gave her the number to my CO, she thanked me & then I was connected to a conversation
that appeared to be between a frame man & his wife. Then it started ringing the party I wanted to originally call &
everyone phreaked out (excuse the pun). I immediately dropped this dual line conference!
You should not mess with the TSPS operator since she KNOWS which number that you are calling from. Your number
will show up on a 10-digit LED read-out (ANI board). She also knows whether or not you are at a fortress phone & she
can trace calls quite readily! Out of all of the operators, she is one of the MOST DANGEROUS.
INWARD operator:
This operator assists your local TSPS ("0") operating connecting calls. She will never question a call as long as the call
is within HER SERVICE AREA. She can only be reached via other operators or by a blue box. From a blue box, you
would dial KP+NPA+121+ST for the INWARD operator that will help you connect any calls within that NPA only.
(Blue Boxing will be discussed in a future file).
DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE Operator:
This is the operator that you are connected to when you dial: 411 or NPA-555-1212. She does not readily know where
you are calling from. She does not have access to unlisted numbers, but she DOES know if an unlisted # exists for a
certain listing.
There is also a directory assistance operator for deaf people who use teletypewriters. If your modem can transfer
BAUDOT [(45« baud). One modem that I know of that will do this is the Apple Cat acoustic or the Atari 830 acousticmodem. Yea I know they are hard to find... but if you want to do this.. look around!) then you can call him/her up and
have an interesting conversation. The number is: 800-855-1155. They use the standard Telex abbreviations such as GA
for go ahead. they tend to be nicer and will talk longer than your regular operators. Also, they are more vulnerable into
being talked out of information through the process of "social engineering" as Chesire Catalyst would put it.
Unfortunately, they do not have access to much. I once bullshitted with one of these operators a while back and I found
out that there are 2 such DA offices that handle TTY. One is in Philadelphia and the other is in California. They have
approx. 7 operators each. Most of the TTY operators think that their job is
boring (based on an official "BIOC poll"). They also feel that they are under-paid. They actually call up a regular DA
number to process your request (sorry, no fancy computers!)
Other operators have access to their own DA by dialing KP+NPA+131+ST (MF).
CN/A operators:
CN/A Operators are operators that do exactly the opposite of what directory assistance operators are for. In my
experience, these operators know more than the DA op's do & they are more susceptible to "social engineering." It is
possible to bullshit a CN/A operator for the NON-PUB DA number (i.e., you give them the name & they give you the
unlisted number. See the article on unlisted numbers in this cookbook for more info about them.). This is due to the
fact that they assume that you are a fellow company employee. Unfortunately, the AT&T breakup has resulted in the
break-up of a few NON-PUB DA numbers and policy changes in CN/A.
INTERCEPT Operator:
The intercept operator is the one that you are connected to when there are not enough recordings available to tell you
that the number has been disconnected or changed. She usually says, "What number you calling?" with a foreign
accent. This is the lowest operator lifeform. Even though they don't know where you are calling from, it is a waste or
your time to try to verbally abuse them since they usually understand very little English anyway.
Incidentally, a few area DO have intelligent INTERCEPT Operators.
OTHER Operators:
And then there are the: Mobile, Ship-to-Shore, Conference, Marine Verify, "Leave Word and Call Back", Rout & Rate
(KP+800+141+1212+ST), & other special operators who have one purpose or another in the network.
Problems with an Operator:
Ask to speak to their supervisor... or better yet the Group Chief (who is the highest ranking official in any office) who
is the equivalent of the Madame in a whorehouse.
By the way, some CO's that will allow you to dial a 0 or 1 as the 4th digit, will also allow you to call special operators
& other fun Tel. Co. numbers without a blue box. This is very rare, though! For example, 212-121-1111 will get you a
NY Inward Operator.
Office Hierarchy
Every switching office in North America (the NPA system), is assigned an office name and class. There are five classes
of offices numbered 1 through 5. Your CO is most likely a class 5 or end office. All long-distance (Toll) calls are
switched by a toll office which can be a class 4, 3, 2, or 1 office. There is also a class 4X office called an intermediate
point. The 4X office is a digital one that can have an unattended exchange attached to it (known as a Remote Switching
Unit (RSU)).
The following chart will list the Office #, name, & how many of those office exist (to the best of my knowledge) in
North America:
Class
1
2
3
4
Name
Regional Center
Sectional Center
Primary Center
Toll Center
Abb
RC
SC
PC
TC
Number Existing
12
67
230
1,3004P
4X
5
6
Toll Point
Intermediate Point
End Office
RSU
TP
IP
EO
RSU
N/A
N/A
19,000
N/A
When connecting a call from one party to another, the switching equipment usually tries to find the shortest route
between the class 5 end office of the caller & the class 5 end office of the called party. If no inter-office trunks exist
between the two parties, it will then move upward to the next highest office for servicing calls (Class 4). If the Class 4
office cannot handle the call by sending it to another Class 4 or 5 office, it will then be sent to the next highest office in
the hierarchy (3). The switching equipment first uses the high-usage interoffice trunk groups, if they are busy then it
goes to the final; trunk groups on the next highest level. If the call cannot be connected, you will probably get a re-
order [120 IPM (interruptions per minute) busy signal] signal. At this time, the guys at Network Operations are
probably shitting in their pants and trying to avoid the dreaded Network Dreadlock (as seen on TV!).
It is also interesting to note that 9 connections in tandem is called ring-around-the-rosy and it has never occurred in
telephone history. This would cause an endless loop connection [a neat way to really screw up the network].
The 10 regional centers in the US & the 2 in Canada are all interconnected. they form the foundation of the entire
telephone network. Since there are only 12 of them, they are listed below:
Class 1 Regional Office Location
Dallas 4 ESS
Wayne, PA
Denver 4T
Regina No. 2SP1-4W (Canada)
St. Louis 4T
Rockdale, GA
Pittsburgh 4E
Montreal No. 1 4AETS (Canada) NPA
214
215
303
306
314
404
412
504

Phone Systems Tutorial III
by The Jolly Roger
Preface:
This article will focus primarily on the standard western electric single- Slot coin telephone (aka fortress fone) which
can be divided into 3 types:
•
•
•
dial-tone first (dtf)
coin-first (cf): (i.e., it wants your $ before you receive a dial tone)
dial post-pay service (pp): you payafter the party answers
Depositing coins (slugs):
Once you have deposited your slug into a fortress, it is subjected to a Gamut of tests. The first obstacle for a slug is the
magnetic trap. This will stop any light-weight magnetic slugs and coins. If it passes this, the slug is then classified as a
nickel, dime, or Quarter. Each slug is then checked for appropriate size and weight. If These tests are passed, it will
then travel through a nickel, dime, or quarter Magnet as appropriate. These magnets set up an eddy current effect which
Causes coins of the appropriate characteristics to slow down so they Will follow the correct trajectory. If all goes well,
the coin will follow the Correct path (such as bouncing off of the nickel anvil) where it will Hopefully fall into the
narrow accepted coin channel. The rather elaborate tests that are performed as the coin travels down the Coin chute will
stop most slugs and other undesirable coins, such as Pennies, which must then be retrieved using the coin release lever.
If the slug miraculously survives the gamut, it will then strike the Appropriate totalizer arm causing a ratchet wheel to
rotate once for every 5-cent increment (e.g., a quarter will cause it to rotate 5 times). The totalizer then causes the coin
signal oscillator to readout a dual-frequency signal indicating the value deposited to acts (a computer) or the Tsps
operator. These are the same tones used by phreaks in the infamous red boxes. For a quarter, 5 beep tones are outpulsed
at 12-17 pulses per second (pps). A dime causes 2 beep tones at 5 - 8« pps while a nickel causes one beep tone at 5 - 8«
pps. A beep consists of 2 tones: 2200 + 1700 hz. A relay in the fortress called the "B Relay" (yes, there is also an 'a
relay') places a capacitor across the speech circuit during totalizer readout to prevent the "customer" from hearing thered box tones. In older 3 slot phones: one bell (1050-1100 hz) for a nickel, two bells for a dime, and one gong (800 hz)
for a quarter are used instead of the modern dual-frequency tones.
TSPS & ACTS
While fortresses are connected to the co of the area, all transactions are handled via the traffic service position system
(tsps). In areas that do not have acts, all calls that require operator assistance, such as calling card and collect, are
automatically routed to a tsps operator position. In an effort to automate fortress service, a computer system known as
automated coin toll service (acts) has been implemented in many areas. Acts listens to the red box signals from the
fones and takes appropriate action. It is acts which says, "two dollars please (pause) please deposit two dollars for the
next ten seconds" (and other variations). Also, if you talk for more than three minutes and then hang-up, acts will call
back and demand your money. Acts is also responsible for automated calling card service. Acts also provide trouble
diagnosis for craftspeople (repairmen specializing in fortresses). For example, there is a coin test which is great for
tuning up red boxes. In many areas this test can be activated by dialing 09591230 at a fortress (thanks to karl marx for
this information). Once activated it will request that you deposit various coins. It will then identify the coin and
outpulse the appropriate red box signal. The coins are usually returned when you hang up. To make sure that there is
actually money in the fone, the co initiates a "ground test" at various times to determine if a coin is actually in the fone.
This is why you must deposit at least a nickel in order to use a red box!
Green Boxes:
Paying the initial rate in order to use a red box (on certain fortresses) left a sour taste in many red boxer's mouths thus
the green box was invented. The green box generates useful tones such as coin collect, coin return, and ringback. These
are the tones that acts or the tsps operator would send to The co when appropriate. Unfortunately, the green box cannot
be used at a fortress station but it must be used by the called party.
Here are the tones:
Coin Collect
Coin Return
Ringback
700 + 1100 Hz
1100 + 1700 Hz
700 + 1700 Hz
Before the called party sends any of these tones, an operator released signal should be sent to alert the MF detectors at
the co. This can be accomplished by sending 900 + 1500 hz or a single 2600 hz wink (90 ms) followed by a 60 ms gap
and then the appropriate signal for at least 900 Ms.
Also, do not forget that the initial rate is collected shortly before the 3 minute period is up. Incidentally, once the above
MF tones for collecting and returning coins reach the co, they are converted into an appropriate dc pulse (-130 volts for
return & +130 volts for collect). This pulse is then sent down the tip to the fortress. This causes the coin relay to either
return or collect the coins. The alleged "t-network" takes advantage of this information. When a pulse for coin collect
(+130 vdc) is sent down the line, it must be grounded somewhere. This is usually either the yellow or black wire. Thus,
if the wires are exposed, these wires can be cut to prevent the pulse from being grounded. When the three minute initial
period is almost up, make sure that the black & yellow wires are severed; then hang up, wait about 15 seconds in case
of a second pulse, reconnect the wires, pick up the fone, hang up again, and if all goes well it should be "jackpot" time.
Physical Attack:
A typical fortress weighs roughly 50 lbs. With an empty coin box. Most of this is accounted for in the armor plating.
Why all the security? Well, Bell contributes it to the following: "social changes during the 1960's made the multislot
coin station a prime target for: vandalism, strong arm robbery, fraud, and theft of service. This brought about the
introduction of the more rugged single slot coin station and a new environment for coin service." As for picking the
lock, I will quote Mr. Phelps: "We often fantasize about 'picking the lock' or 'getting a master key.' Well, you can forget
about it. I don't like to discourage people, but it will save you from wasting a lot of our time--time which can be put to
better use (heh, heh)." As for physical attack, the coin plate is secured on all four side by hardened steel bolts which
pass through two
slots each. These bolts are in turn interlocked by the main lock. One phreak I know did manage to take one of the
'mothers' home (which was attached to a piece of plywood at a construction site; otherwise, the permanent ones are a
bitch to detach from the wall!). It took him almost ten hours to open the coin box using a power drill, sledge hammers,
and crowbars (which was empty -- perhaps next time, he will deposit a coin first to hear if it slushes down nicely or hits
the empty bottom with a clunk.)
Taking the fone offers a higher margin of success. Although this may be difficult often requiring brute force and there
has been several cases of back axles being lost trying to take down a fone! A quick and dirty way to open the coin box
is by using a shotgun. In Detroit, after ecologists cleaned out a municipal pond, they found 168 coin phones rifled. In
colder areas, such as Canada, some shrewd people tape up the fones using duct tape, pour in water, and come back thenext day when the water will have froze thus expanding and cracking the fone open. In one case, "unauthorized coin
collectors" where caught when they brought $6,000 in change to a bank and the bank became suspicious... At any rate,
the main lock is an eight level tumbler located on the right side of the coin box. This lock has 390,625 possible
positions (5 ^ 8, since there are 8 tumblers each with 5 possible positions) thus it is highly pick resistant! The lock is
held in place by 4 screws. If there is sufficient clearance to the right of the fone, it is conceivable to punch out the
screws using the drilling pattern below (provided by Alexander Muddy in tap #32):
!!
^
!!
!
! 1- 3/16 " !!
!
!<--- --->!!
1-«"
--------------------
!
! !
!! !
!
! (+)
(+)-! -----------
---!
!! !
^
! !
!! ! !
! !
(Z) !! !
!
! !
!! ! 2-3/16"
---!
!! !
!
! (+)
(+) !
!
!
!! !
!
-------------------- -----------
!!
!!
(Z) KEYHOLE (+) SCREWS
!!
After this is accomplished, the lock can be pushed backwards disengaging the lock from the cover plate. The four bolts
of the cover plate can then be retracted by turning the bolt works with a simple key in the shape of the hole on the coin
plate (see diagram below). Of course, there are other methods and drilling patterns.
_
! !
( )
!_!
[ROUGHLY]
DIAGRAM OF COVER PLATE KEYHOLE
The top cover uses a similar, but not as strong locking method with the keyhole depicted above on the top left hide and
a regular lock (probably tumbler also) on the top right-hand side. It is interesting to experiment with the coin chute and
the fortresses own "red box" which bell didn't have the balls to color red.
Miscellaneous:
In a few areas (rural & Canada), post-pay service exists. With this type of service, the mouthpiece is cut off until the
caller deposits money when the called party answers. This also allows for free calls to weather and other dial-it
services! Recently, 2600 magazine announced the clear box which consists of a telephone pickup coil and a small amp.
It is based on the principal that the receiver is also a weak transmitter and that by amplifying your signal you can talk
via the transmitter thus avoiding costly telephone charges! Most fortresses are found in the 9xxx area. Under former
bell areas, they usually start at 98xx (right below the 99xx official series) and move downward.
Since the line, not the fone, determines whether or not a deposit must be made, dtf & charge-a-call fones make great
extensions! Finally, fortress fones allow for a new hobby--instruction plate collecting. All that is required is a flat-head
screwdriver and a pair of needle-nose pliers. Simply use the screwdriver to lift underneath the plate so that you can
grab it with the pliers and yank downwards. I would suggest covering the tips of the pliers with electrical tape to
prevent scratching. Ten cent plates are definitely becoming a "rarity!"
Fortress security:
While a lonely fortress may seem the perfect target, beware! The gestapo has been known to stake out fortresses for as
long as 6 years according to the grass roots quarterly. To avoid any problems, do not use the same fones repeatedly forboxing, calling cards, & other experiments. The Telco knows how much money should be in the coin box and when its
not there they tend to get perturbed (Read: Pissed Off).
